---
title: "Ash and Salt"
date: "1588-01-24"
slug: "ash-and-salt"
place: "Unnamed Isle, Western Sea"
mood: "Stunned"
lesson: "Stone, Wind, Fire, Water keep you alive"
arc: "Five Against the Storm"
chronology:
  index: 49
  prev: "1589-04-12-the-last-lesson"
  next: "1588-01-25-splinters-and-shelter"
tags: ["shipwreck", "survival", "measure", "ledger", "campcraft"]
factions: ["Westward Trader", "Crescent Hearth"]
voices: ["Ledger", "Tide"]
foreshadow:
  - "Four names in a ledger become four points of a star"
  - "A beacon far away learns to warn, then to command"
  - "The vow of silence bends under hunger and salt"
homeExclude: true
---

I woke with a mouth full of brine and a head full of numbers. One broken spar. Two lengths of line. Three breaths before the next wave. I crawled above the wrack line and took count.

Garran Strake hauled the mast as if it were a stubborn ox. Elowen Rell checked my pupils and then the sky. Ivor Kestrel coughed once, spat twice, and started piling driftwood. Four alive. The rest gone to the ledger that no man can balance.

We spoke of Captain Vess only once. Garran said the word captain like a rank and a farewell. Rell looked at the horizon and did not blink. I wrote the names of the dead in a dry corner of my log and underlined them with salt.

Stone first. Ivor found a slab that would take a spark and an edge. Rell showed me how to wedge it to split a limb clean. We made stakes and a windbreak. We set our feet where the slope would shed rain.

Wind next. Garran taught the shelter to breathe. He laced the opening to the lee and trimmed the fronds until they hummed instead of flapped. We listened for a steady note. Measure lives in sound.

Fire after. I shaved curls with the spine of my knife and nursed a coal in a shell. The flame took slow. We fed it like a hungry child until the smoke turned sweet. I dried the ledger at arm’s length. Pages buckled, letters lived.

Water last. Rell dug above the high tide line and found a slow seep. We ringed it with stones and waited. The pool cleared. She tasted first, then nodded. We filled the pot, and for a moment the world was simple.

At dark we laid four marks in the sand, heel to toe, a star that only we would understand. Garran watched the surf. Ivor checked the lashings. Rell counted the beats between sets. I wrote a single line.

We will live if we remember the order of things.

{{< lutebox pool="letters2" title="Open a Letter: Ash and Salt" hint="Four footprints above the kelp line, a shell of coals, a ledger drying by the fire." cooldown="0" >}}
