---
title: "Splinters and Shelter"
date: "1588-01-25"
slug: "splinters-and-shelter"
place: "Unnamed Isle, Western Sea"
mood: "Resolute"
lesson: "Build with breath, bind with measure"
arc: "Five Against the Storm"
chronology:
  index: 50
  prev: "1588-01-24-ash-and-salt"
  next: "1588-01-26-smoke-and-signal"
tags: ["survival", "campcraft", "rigging", "measure", "ledger"]
factions: ["Crescent Hearth"]
voices: ["Ledger", "Stone"]
foreshadow:
  - "A broken yard becomes a spar for a future hull"
  - "A line taught for a shelter will later hold a sail"
  - "Eight points carved in driftwood point farther than home"
homeExclude: true
---

Morning gave us tasks and we took them in order. I counted tools. Garran stripped the wreck of anything that would take a lash. Rell mapped the lee of the scrub and marked a floor with stakes. Ivor hummed until the rhythm of the work matched the rhythm of the sea.

We split limbs along the grain with stone and patience. Every cut had a breath. Every lash had a count. Rell knotted the ridge with a rigger’s hands and showed me how to listen for a line gone wrong. A good knot speaks before it fails.

The shelter rose by degrees. First a frame. Then a skin of fronds laid like scales. We skirted the feet with sand to stop the crawl of wind. Garran tested the arch with his shoulder and nodded once. I wrote that down. A nod from him is worth a paragraph.

We laid shelves from drift planks and set a dry box for flint, twine, and the ledger. I carved an eight-point star into the threshold to remind us where our feet live. Ivor brewed bark and left it to cool in the shade. Rell marked a tally of water pots with a line for each dusk.

When the heat leaned close we sat in the shade of our own making and spoke of next steps. Smoke first, for rescue or for luck. Signal second, because even luck likes a plan. Then fish, then a better blade, then a map made of steps and landmarks and time.

Before dark I walked the perimeter with the ledger under my arm and counted again. Four alive. One shelter sound. Lines snug. Fire laid for morning. I closed the book on the word measure and slept without dreaming.

{{< lutebox pool="letters2" title="Open a Letter: Splinters and Shelter" hint="A carved star on a threshold, a knotted ridge line, a ledger shut on the word measure." cooldown="0" >}}
